Markus Strickert
Lund Observatory
Lund UniversityGalactic Dynamics
and the spread of
Galactic Civilisations
Degree project of 15 higher education credits
June 2020
Supervisors: Anders Johansen and Paul McMillan
Lund Observatory
Box 43SE-221 00  LundSweden2020-EXA168
Abstract
The idea of the spread of life through the galaxy is, in most minds, considered science
ction. Yet, scientists argue that most galaxies have had more than enough time for
civilisation development and space travel. In this thesis I simulate how civilisations
can spread through the galaxy via close encountering stars, assuming they travel at
sub-relativistic speeds. A dened region around the solar neighborhood, populated
by Sun-like stars, is simulated over time by tracking the motion of stars using the
epicycle approximation. The systems of stars include suitable planets for life devel-
opment (abiogenesis) where each step of the planet's evolution process is represented
by a certain evolution index. The indices are governed by comparing a random num-
ber to a probability distribution, representing the probability for a planet to evolve.
The probability distribution is in turn extended by including a steepness parameter
N, whereN= 0 gives a Poisson distribution while N > 1 produces a distribution
that is more tightly peeked. The model keeps track of close encountering stars,
which allow for civilisations to colonize a passing, habitable planet. On average, a
star's nearest neighbor is at a distance of 36, 47, and 82 pc for simulations with
1000, 600, and 200 stars respectively. By changing the probability distribution that
governs the chance of index increase, the rst technologically developed civilisation
was found after 0.27, 3.65, or 4.8 Gyr, depending on the steepness parameter of
the probability distribution. The number of colonized planets over time followed an
exponential increase in the beginning with a fall-o close to the saturation point of
the number of stars. For star counts of 200, 600, and 1000 stars, allowing only one
civilisation to travel while the others remain stationary on their home planets, the
galaxy became dominated by the single spreading civilisation only when considering
1000 stars with a steepness parameter of N= 3. In this case, 89 per cent of the
planets were colonized by the single civilisation. For 200, 600 and 1000 stars and
N= 0, the stationary civilisations dominated, colonizing 99 %, 99.3 % and 99.7 %
of the planets respectively. For N= 3, 85 % of the 200 planets and 66 % of the 600
planets were dominated by the stationary civilisations after 12 Gyr. This implies
that decreasing the mean distance between stars (by including more stars) in addi-
tion to including the steepness parameter, made it possible for a single civilisation
to colonize the galaxy faster than the rate of which stationary civilisations develop.
Popul arvetenskaplig beskrivning
-Ar rymden en enda stor tunnelbana?
Finns det utomjordiskt liv i universum? Konceptet av Fermi paradoxen har f orun-
drat forskare sedan tidigt 50-tal. Den st aller fr agan om varf or utomjordiskt liv inte
har blivit uppt ackt  annu. I j amf orelse med andra system i universum  ar v art sol-
system relativt ungt med sina 4,6 miljarder  ar. Detta betyder att stj arnor med
 aldre planetsystem b or haft mer  an nog tid f or en utomjordisk civilisation att sprida
sig genom universum. Stuart Armstrong och Anders Sandberg h avdar i ett pap-
per (Armstrong and Sandberg 2013) att kolonisera universum  ar en \relativt enkel
uppgift" f or en civilisation med utvecklad teknologi och energik allor rustat f or rym-
dresor.
Men, f or m ojligheten av utomjordiska resor beh ovs kunskap kring planetsystem och
stj arnors faktiska r orelse samt vilka m ojligheter dessa har att utveckla beboeliga
f orh allanden. Vi vill inte spendera en livstid s okande efter en planet f or att tillslut
hamna p a en planet som Gliese 581c, som skulle - vilket en artikel i Bored Panda
(Stella 2019) bildligt beskriver - "sm alta dig levande p a n arsidan och frysa dig till
en sn ogubbe p a fj arrsidan".
Trots att rymden  ar relativt tom nns  and a tonvis av omkringytande objekt vilket
kan p averka stj arnors r orelse och dra dem ur deras banor. Aven strukturen av
galaxen kan p averka s attet som stj arnorna r or sig. Dessa s a kallade \st orningar"
g or att stj arnor b orja vobbla kring sin, i j amvikt, cirkul ara bana, vilka tillsammans
med stj arnornas r orelse, bildar s a kallade epicykelr orelser.
I mitt projekt  ar m alet att simulera spridningen av en civilisation genom en galax likt
v ar egen. F or att lyckas med detta m aste en f orst aelse kring dessa epicykelr orelser
skapas. Dessutom, att f a en uppfattning om vilka sannolikheter och m ojligheter det
nns f or planeter att skapa beboeliga f orh allanden. Genom att skapa ett datorskript,
inneh allande denna bakomliggande fysik, kan en simulering  over spridningen g oras.
Det slutgiltiga resultatet ger en beskrivning  over hur ett s adant datorskript kan byg-
gas upp, samt en illustrativ simulering  over spridningen av en eller era civilisationer
genom galaxen.
S a fr agan  ar tillslut:  ar rymden bara en stor tunnelbana av anslutande sp ar att resa
med? Kan det vara s a att dessa sp ar bara inte  ar tillr ackligt utvecklade  annu och
att v ar kapacitet inte f or tillf allet r acker till? Den h ar simuleringen kan ge insikt i
varf or vi inte redan nu  ater v ara middagsm altider tillsammans med utomjordingar
och d artill, ge en uppfattning om n ar och om den m ojligheten n agonsin kommer att
nnas.
Contents
List of Figures 3
List of Tables 7
Acknowledgements 8
Introduction 9
1 Galactic Dynamics 11
1.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
1.2 Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
1.2.1 Epicycle approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
1.2.2 Close encounters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
1.2.3 Simulation setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2 Galactic Civilisations 16
2.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.2 Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.2.1 Drake's equation and evolution indices . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.2.2 Stochastic manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.2.3 Abiogenesis and evolution states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3 Algorithm and Method 20
3.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2 Galactic dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3 Galactic civilisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4 Results 25
4.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2 Galactic dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3 Galactic civilisations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5 Discussions and conclusions 38
A Animations 42
B Formal derivation of the epicyclic approximation 47
1
CONTENTS CONTENTS
Bibliography 49
2
List of Figures
4.1 A plot illustrating the radial oscillations for a star in an epicyclic orbit
as a function of time, with an oscillating amplitude of 0:7 kpc. . . 26
4.2 A plot illustrating the azimuthal motion of two stars relative to the
center of the box. Note the dierence between the motion of the two
stars. The motion in Rdepends on several stochastic parameters
(equation 1.16) which makes the outcome of each star unique. Since
the motion is seen relative to the center of the moving box, the ret-
rograde motion of one star can be seen as it appears to \turn" along
its orbit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3 A plot illustrating the vertical oscillation over time for one star. The
mean vertical amplitude of oscillation considering 1000 stars is 0.6
kpc, but is, due to the random amplitude b, frequency and phaze
'zdierent for each star. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4 A gure displaying the Cartesian motion of one star considering the
x=Rcos () R0andy=Rsin () motions in the plane, disre-
garding any vertical oscillations. Since the motion is relative to the
center of the box, at a distance R0from the galactic center, the  R0
term is included. Notice that the orbits of stars are also followed out-
side the box, hence the range on the x-axis is extended compared to
the values seen in Table 1.1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.5 A plot showing the average number of close encounters against the
number of iterations per Gyr. The limit distance is set to 10 pc and
the relations are shown for 400- up to 1000 stars in steps of 200.
The convergence for all numbers of stars tested, occurs at 10000
iterations or equally, a time step of 0.01 Myr with the standard
deviation shown as error bars on each of the plots. The standard
deviation follows the regular =qP(xi xmean)2
NwithNdenoting the
total amount of stars considered. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3
LIST OF FIGURES LIST OF FIGURES
4.6 A gure showing screenshots of 6 iterations for the animation of the
epicycle motion of 100 stars. The purpose is to show how the number
of close encounters increases over time. In this simulation, 1 time
unit = 1 Myr with the blue dots indicating stars that under some
iteration had a close encounter. The rst close encountering stars are
found after150 Myr and continue to increase over time. Note that
the same star can be close to more than one star in the time of the
simulation, which explains why there are an uneven number of stars
in some screenshots. This is seen in (b)where one of the three stars
in the rst pair created, formed a new close encounter with the third
star. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.7 A histogram showing times for the rst planet to reach an evolution
indexE3. Here, dtis chosen to the optimized value of 1/10000 Gyr
(obtained in section 4.2) and the steepness parameter Nfrom equa-
tion (2.3) is varied. The times were determined to 270 Myr,3:65
Gyr and4:8 Gyr forN= 0,N= 3 andN= 1000 respectively.
The simulation was made with 200 stars. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.8 A comparison between the change of evolution indices for 200 stars
over 12 Gyr. The blue dash-dotted line shows index 1 stars, the orange
dashed line index 2 stars and the lled green index 3 stars. In (b),
a steepness parameter of N= 3 has been added, giving the charac-
teristic eect of narrowing the spread of indices since the probability
distribution becomes more narrow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.9 Two histograms showing the number of colonized planets per civilisa-
tion on the vertical axis and the civilisation number Cin rising order
on the horizontal axis. Here, C= 0;1;2;3;:::;n whereC= 1 denotes
the rst developed civilisation and nstands for the last civilisation
to develop on a planet. The left panel depicts this for a steepness
parameterN= 0 and the right panel N= 3. Note that in the case of
N= 3, the rst few developed civilisations dominate while for N= 0,
there is a more uniform distribution between colonized planets. The
simulation is performed considering 1000 stars. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.10 The graph illustrates the fraction of planets colonized when only a
single civilisation is able to travel between stars, while the other civil-
isations stay stationary on their home planets. Nspreading describes
the planets colonized by the single civilisation and Nstationary are the
planets colonized by stationary civilisations. The left plot displays the
fraction for 200, 600 and 1000 stars for steepness parameter N= 3 and
the right shows this for N= 0. Note that if Nspreading=Nstationary>1,
the single civilisation dominates. It can be seen that only for 1000
stars withN= 3, the single civilisation has colonized more planets
than there are planets with stationary civilisations. The convergence
seen in the graphs is when there are no more planets to colonize,
hence, when every star has reached evolution index 3. Note that the
simulation in the right panel begins at time 3 Gyr. This is the time
when the rst civilisation has developed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4
LIST OF FIGURES LIST OF FIGURES
4.11 An illustration over the evolution of indices for 200 stars and the
colonization of the rst developed civilisation. Index 0 stars are seen
as red stars, index 1 stars as light blue, index 2 stars as olive green,
index 3 stars as navy blue and the colonized stars by one civilisation
are seen as red circles. The steepness parameter is set to N= 0. The
time stamps of the screenshots are chosen to illustrate the times of
transition, thus, when most of the stars increase in index. The time
step used is d t= 2:4 Myr and the time of the simulation is set to 12
Gyr. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.12 An illustration over the evolution of indices for 200 stars and the col-
onization of the rst developed civilisation. Index 0 stars are seen
as red stars, index 1 stars as light blue, index 2 stars as olive green,
index 3 stars as navy blue and the colonized stars by one civilisation
are seen as red circles. The steepness parameter is set to N= 3. The
time stamps of the screenshots are chosen to illustrate the times of
transition, thus, when most of the stars increase in index. In compari-
son to gure 4.11, there is very little mixing between the indices. This
is a result from the included steepness parameter which narrows the
probability distribution, making the chance of index increase small
for times smaller than the process times Tn. The time step used is
dt= 2:4 Myr and the time of the simulation is set to 12 Gyr. . . . . . 37
A.1 A gure showing screenshots of 6 consecutive iterations for the ani-
mation of the epicycle motion of 100 stars. The purpose is to show
how stars move in epicycle motion. In this simulation, 1 time unit =
1 Myr with the blue dots indicating stars that under some iteration
had a close encounter. Note that the same star can be close to more
than one star in the time of the simulation, which explains why there
are an uneven number of stars in some screenshots. This is seen in
(b)where one of the three stars in the rst pair created, formed a
new close encounter with the third star. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
A.2 A gure showing screenshots of 6 iterations for the animation of the
epicycle motion of 100 stars. The purpose is to show how the number
of close encounters increases over time. In this simulation, 1 time
unit = 1 Myr with the blue dots indicating stars that under some
iteration had a close encounter. The rst close encountering stars are
found after150 Myr and continue to increase over time. Note that
the same star can be close to more than one star in the time of the
simulation, which explains why there are an uneven number of stars
in some screenshots. This is seen in (b)where one of the three stars
in the rst pair created, formed a new close encounter with the third
star. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5
LIST OF FIGURES LIST OF FIGURES
A.3 An illustration over the evolution of indices for 200 stars and the
colonisation of the rst developed civilisation. Index 0 stars are seen
as red stars, index 1 stars as light blue, index 2 stars as olive green,
index 3 stars as navy blue and the colonized stars are seen as red ball
shapes. The steepness parameter is set to N= 0. The time stamps
of the screenshots are chosen to illustrate the times of transition,
thus, when most of the stars increase in index. The time step used is
dt= 2:4 Myr and the time of the simulation is set to 12 Gyr. . . . . . 45
A.4 An illustration over the evolution of indices for 200 stars and the
colonisation of the rst developed civilisation. Index 0 stars are seen
as red stars, index 1 stars as light blue, index 2 stars as olive green,
index 3 stars as navy blue and the colonized stars are seen as red ball
shapes. The steepness parameter is set to N= 3. The time stamps
of the screenshots are chosen to illustrate the times of transition,
thus, when most of the stars increase in index. In comparison to
gure 4.11, there is very little mixing between the indices. This is
a result from the included steepness parameter which narrows the
probability distribution, making the chance of index increase small
for times smaller than the process times Tn. The time step used is
dt= 2:4 Myr and the time of the simulation is set to 12 Gyr. . . . . . 46
6
List of Tables
1.1 A table displaying the boundary values for the region around the
solar neighborhood in terms of the starting positions in radius Rand
azimuth angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.1 A table describing the dierent evolution indices used in the script.
Since the spreading of civilisations in general occurs several times,
theTprocess is set totfor index2, indicating the dierent times this
happens over the simulation period. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.1 A table showing the average amount of close encounters found over
the time of 1 Gyr, depending on the number of stars given. Here, max
denotes the maximum standard deviation found and fthe fraction
between close encounters and all possible pairs of stars. . . . . . . . . 29
7
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest appreciation to my supervisors Anders Johansen
and Paul McMillan who guided me through this project and helped me face di-
culties throughout the work. I also wish to thank my fellow bachelor colleagues for
discussing and helping me debugging issues regarding the code. Finally, I would
like to extend my appreciation to the authors of the Numpy and Scipy packages
(Oliphant 2006; Virtanen et al. 2020) whose works have helped me optimize the
code used for the project.
8
Introduction
For centuries, scientists have been trying to solve the conundrum of nding extrater-
restrial life in the universe. In the 1950s, the Italian-American physicist Enrico
Fermi introduced the famous paradox of why any extraterrestrial life form has not
yet visited us, despite knowing the age of the Universe would be enough time for
a civilisation to develop modest technology for space travel (Howell 2018). Even
nearby galaxies, with typical ages of 10 - 13 Gyr (Nasa 2019) would have more than
enough time to develop a civilisation and for them to travel to nearby systems. Ac-
cording to the evolution patterns on Earth, the time it takes for the development
of an intelligent civilisation is 4:54 Gyr. For them to be able to colonize stars in
the galaxy, they would have to be technological enough for traveling vast distances
in space. A \suciently technological civilisation" could be, as Kaku (2008, p.158
- 160) describes, a type I civilisation which has the opportunity for sub-relativistic
space travel via e.g. mammoth solar sails, which could reach up to half the light ve-
locity driven by powerful lasers located on the moon, or via ramjet fusion, which uses
the heavily abundant hydrogen in space to \scoop" its way through the galaxy. If the
goal was to travel as fast as possible through the entire galaxy contrary to colonize
planets around sun-like stars, it would \only" take an additional 0.65 Myr according
to Carroll-Nellenback et al. (2019) when traveling in sub-relativistic speeds.
This project will further explore how spreading to nearby systems could be a possi-
bility by simulating the spread of civilisations through the galaxy, using numerical
methods. A limited section (abbreviated \box" or \region") is dened around the
solar neighborhood, including a given amount of stars. In this region, the galaxy
is assumed to have homogeneous star density in the galactic plane with periodic
azimuthal boundaries such that the box moves in the galactic plane, orbiting the
galactic center at a distance called the guiding center. The stars inside this box
will follow epicyclic motions, oscillating radially, vertically, and in the azimuth. The
project aims to track the colonization of suitable planets by one or several space-
traveling civilisations in the box, using the true motion of stars and the probabilities
for close encountering stars to develop intelligent life. The project compares how
altering the probability distribution for life development of planets around suitable
stars could make one or several space-traveling civilisations dominant in terms of the
number of colonized planets. It also investigates how such planets evolve, depend-
ing on if the planets evolve in time scales according to Earth's or according to more
randomized time scales. The fundamentals of this project are based on stochastic
processes to simulate motions as well as probabilities. Monte Carlo methods will
9
LIST OF TABLES LIST OF TABLES
be implemented to nd probability distributions of life development for the systems
considered.
10
Chapter 1
Galactic Dynamics
1.1 Background
This chapter reviews the extension of circular- into non-circular orbits for stars using
the epicycle approximation. A nonperturbative motion for a star is circular around
the guiding center with a distance R0to the galactic center. The guiding center is
used as a reference distance and is for this project chosen in the solar neighborhood.
Near-circular orbits of stars caused by disturbances from the galactic potential will
be derived partly using Taylor expansions around the guiding center, meaning only a
limited region around R0can be used. Furthermore, the star density of the galaxy is
set to be directionally homogeneous in the plane with periodic azimuthal boundaries,
meaning that a star moving out of the section instantaneously emerges back on the
opposite side. The stars are allowed to move outside the section, both vertically and
radially.
1.2 Theory
1.2.1 Epicycle approximation
The epicycle approximation allows a solution for near-circular orbits of stars in three
dimensions. The method describes how orbits projected onto the galactic plane can
be described as ellipses around the guiding center. Near-circular orbits can be caused
by small velocity perturbations in space that disturb orbits of stars. It can also be
created directly from the galactic potential, where for example the gravitational
eld from the spiral arms (called spiral potential) can cause a star to fall towards
the centre of gravity when it is in its slowest part of its orbit (apocentre), disturbing
its equilibrium orbit (Francis 2009). Studying these motions in a moving reference
frame, the stars can sometimes appear to change the direction of their orbit. This
is called retrograde motion or epicycles (Cubarsi 2013; Makarov et al. 2004).
For a star in a circular galactic orbit in the solar neighbourhood, the radial distance
R=R0, velocityV=V0, angular velocity !0=V0=R0and angular momentum
L0=V0R0are assumed to be constant and hence, the central attraction balances
11
1.2. THEORY CHAPTER 1. GALACTIC DYNAMICS
the centrifugal force. The central gravitiational force is given by
Fg(R) =Vc(R)2
R; (1.1)
whereVcis the circular rotation in the galactic plane and Ris the radial distance to
the center. Inside a homogeneous spherical mass, FgR, while a at rotation curve
yieldsFgR 1. By introducing the Oort's constant , this can be approximated
as a power law on the form
Fg(R) =F0(R=R); (1.2)
withF0describing the force at the sun's distance R, from the galactic centre. In
the solar neighborhood, the Oort's constant in equation (1.2) can be found via
= 3A+B
A B; (1.3)
whereAandBare coecients in km/s/kpc describing the shearing motion of the
disk around the sun, and the vorticity in the solar neighborhood respectively. The
circular motion in cylindrical coordinates for the star follows the motion given in
Lindegren (2010) as8
><
>:R(t) =R0
(t) =c(t)0+!0t
z(t) =z0; (1.4)
wherez0lies in the plane of the galaxy, 0is the starting azimuthal position of the
star andcis the circular azimuthal motion in the galactic plane. For non-circular
orbits, the radial distance is a function of time, and the gravitational force can be
approximated by
Fg(R) =L2
0R 3
0(R=R 0); (1.5)
where2[ 2;1]1gives information about the local spatial variations of the stars
(Olling and Dehnen 2003). For stars close to the solar position,  1:2 (Lindegren
2010). Equation (1.5) is a combination of equation (1.1) and (1.2), where F0has
been rewritten in terms of the angular momentum L0=V0R0asF0=L2
0R 3
0. Since
stars in non-circular motions have varying radial distance to the galactic center, R0
denes the average position of a star, measured in kpc. Additionally, the centrifugal
force is described by
Fc=L2R 3: (1.6)
A small perturbation in space2can disturb the orbit of a star, making it oscillate
around its guiding center. A radial push outwards begins an outward motion of the
star (R>R 0), however, since the Oort's constant  2, the centrifugal force will
decrease more rapidly than the gravitational attraction, making the resulting accel-
eration, and therefore motion, pointing inwards ( R< 0)3. Note that in this project,
1A value< 2 would give negative mass density according to the Poisson equation.
2This can be caused by e.g. merging objects that gravitationally pull the star out of its orbit
or instabilities in the evolution of the star.
3Conversely, an inward push would result in an outward motion where R> 0
12
1.2. THEORY CHAPTER 1. GALACTIC DYNAMICS
the orbits are followed assuming these perturbations from the galactic potential has
already happened.
Let a star receive a push that makes it oscillate around its guiding center. The radial
acceleration with conservation of angular momentum, R(t)2_(t), follows
R(t) =Fc Fg=L2
0R(t) 3 L2
0R 3
0(R(t)=R0); (1.7)
where the expanded radial motion due to the perturbation is the addition of an
expansion termj(t)jR0, giving the total radial motion to be
R(t) =R0+(t) =R0
1 +(t)
R0
; (1.8)
around the galactic center. From the radial acceleration in equation (1.7), inserting
the total radial motion yields a dierential equation for the expansion term on the
form (t) = 2(t), with=!0(3 +)1=2as the angular frequency, with solution
(t) =asin(t+'): (1.9)
Here,adenotes the amplitude of a harmonic oscillator and 'is the phase. The
conservation of angular momentum now yields a solution for the motion in azimuth.
By inserting the total radial motion from equation (1.8) in L0=R(t)2_(t), the
motion becomes
(t) =0+!0t+2!0
R0acos(t+'): (1.10)
The vertical motion is described by
z=bcos(t+'z); (1.11)
whereis the vertical frequency and 'zthe vertical phase. The complete epicycle
motion assuming epicyclic approximation is (e.g. Van Den Bosch 2020)
8
><
>:R(t) =R0+asin(t+')
(t) =0+!0t+2!0
R0acos(t+')
z(t) =bcos(t+'z): (1.12)
We derive this more formally in Appendix B. Intuitively, the Randzterms are
simple oscillations around the equilibrium orbits at the distance R0from the galactic
center. The linear term !0tin the azimuthal motion describes the linear angular
motion of a star around the galaxy in addition to its starting position 0. The
coordinate ( R0;0+!0t) is known as the guiding centre of the orbit.
The orbital frequencies !0;and, in units of Gyr 1, are obtained from a linear
relation tted to the Milky Way potential of McMillan (2017) and follows
8
><
>:!0= 30 3:5(R0 Rc)
= 42 6(R0 Rc)
= 83 12:5(R0 Rc); (1.13)
13
1.2. THEORY CHAPTER 1. GALACTIC DYNAMICS
whereRc= 8 kpc denotes the distance from the center of the box to the galactic
center. Note that the values 30, 42 and 83 have units Gyr 1and 3.5, 6, 12.5 have
units Gyr 1kpc 1. In the epicycle approximation, we only consider frequency terms
up to second order and thus, these frequencies are independent on size of orbit.
Finally, the velocity in the azimuthal plane V=R_obeys
V(t) =R
!0 2!0
R0asin (t+')
: (1.14)
1.2.2 Close encounters
The distance between two stars in a 3-dimensional box can be calculated using the
Euclidean distance via
d(p;q) =vuut3X
i=1(qi pi)2; (1.15)
where pandqdenote the position in ( R;R;z) of the stars in 3-dimensional
Euclidean space. We dene the limit distance, rt, as the maximum distance a
civilisation is willing to travel between two stars. If the distance d(p;q)< r t, the
stars count as close encounters and the civilisation could potentially4travel there.
It is important to note that pairs of stars can stay together over a long period of
time. But since we do not include star clusters of the mutual gravity of stars, these
are much more likely to be close encounters than long lived pairs.
1.2.3 Simulation setup
To nd the stars counting as close encounters, a section (or \box") around the solar
neighborhood is simulated, including all of the investigated stars. The box has
azimuthal motion according to equation (1.16) and the boundaries of the box are
periodic in , yielding the constraint of the star's motion to always be inside the
box. Table 1.1 states its dierent boundary values. The motion of stars, relative to
the center of the box Rcis
R=R 
[(t) !0(Rc)t min] mod [max min]
+min; (1.16)
whereminandmaxare dened in Table 1.1 and !0(Rc) = 30 Gyr 1is the constant
angular motion of the box when orbiting the galactic center. The close encounters
will be further used for tracking the spread of civilisations between planets, via these
close encounters. The details of how civilisations can spread through the box are
described in chapter 2.
Furthermore, the amplitudes aandb, starting positions R0and0, phases'and'z
and orbital frequencies !,and(since they depend on R0) seen in equation (1.12),
are randomly chosen for the simulation. By dierentiating the radial and vertical
motions seen in equation (1.12) we can extract their amplitudes aandbas typical
values depending on the radial and vertical velocity dispersion's. Since the motions
4If conditions in section 2.2.1 are met.
14
1.2. THEORY CHAPTER 1. GALACTIC DYNAMICS
Table 1.1: A table displaying the boundary values for the region around the solar
neighborhood in terms of the starting positions in radius Rand azimuth angle .
MAX MIN
R[kpc] 7.5 8.5
[rad] -1/12 1/12
are sinusoidal, the average velocities are1
2dt=dR=1p
2aand1
2dt=dz=1p
2b. The
values of the velocity dispersion's5are chosen from Aumer and Binney (2009) where
dt/dRVR20 kpc/Gyr and d z/dtVz10 kpc/Gyr.
By solving for aandb, the typical amplitude values used for the motion of stars
in the simulation becomes a=p
2VR=andb=p
2Vz=. The amplitudes
are furthermore multiplied by a random number, s, from a right-sided Gaussian
distribution, thus, chosen as8
><
>:a=jsp
2VR
j
b=jsp
2Vz
j: (1.17)
The starting positions R0and0are likewise randomly chosen within the boundaries
of Table 1.1 using Python's np.random.rand() command. The phases are chosen by
the same procedure as R0and0in the interval of ( ';' z)2[0;2]. In the vertical
direction, we do not consider any boundaries.
The value of the limit distance is set to rt= 10 pc in the simulation. This value
is chosen such that civilisations can travel between stars within the span of their
lifetimes. This is in turn based on that civilisations use fusion engines to travel up
to 77 per cent of the speed of light (Kaku 2008). At this speed it takes at least
42.4 years to travel this distance. A lower value would be more convenient for the
civilisation since it reduces travel times, while a larger value would force them to live
their entire lives on a spacecraft. However, increasing the value of the limit distance
would indeed increase the number of possible stars that the civilisation can colonize
since more stars fall into the category of being close encounters.
5To simplify calculations, velocities are expressed in kpc/Gyr. Note that 1 kpc/Gyr '1 km/s.
15
Chapter 2
Galactic Civilisations
2.1 Background
This chapter extends the theory introduced in chapter 1. It uses the dynamics
of stars in the box to track the spreading of civilisations through the galaxy. The
distances between the stars inside the box are mapped over the time of the simulation
and checked for a certain limit distance, called rt. Every star has an evolution
index representing the evolutionary states of an orbiting planet, suitable for life
development. The indices are based on Drake's equation (2.1) and properly dened
in section 2.2.3. A civilisation can arise on a planet that supports the necessities for
intelligent life. It can then spread to other planets that have developed habitable
conditions. Pseudo-random numbers are generated for every star at every time step
which work as switches between the dierent indices. This will indicate the state of
the star-system as well as determine which system the civilisation can travel to.
2.2 Theory
2.2.1 Drake's equation and evolution indices
According to Frank Drake (SETI 2020), an estimation over the number of techno-
logical civilisations existing in the universe is based on several probability factors.
The number of civilisations N, able to communicate their existence in our galaxy
can be estimated with
N=RbT; (2.1)
whereRbdescribes the rate of broadcasting civilisations that arise per unit time in
the galaxy and Tthe time interval of broadcasting. Note that Tdepends on the
survival time of the civilisation and the time that the civilisation can continuously
broadcast. The Rbcomponent is divided into several sub-factors, describing dierent
stages for a suitable star to form a planet with a broadcasting civilisation. The
complete equation is commonly written as
Rb=RppnEplpipc; (2.2)
16
2.2. THEORY CHAPTER 2. GALACTIC CIVILISATIONS
stating that the rate of emergence of new broadcasting civilisations is equal to the
suitable stars forming per unit time multiplied by the average mean number of
civilizations communicating per star. The dierent parameters are dened as
8
>>>>>>>><
>>>>>>>>:R= Rate of stars suitable for life development to form
pp= Probability of formation of planets around a suitable star
nE= Average number of suitable planets located in the habitable zone, per planetary system
pl= Probability of life appearing on such a planet
pi= Probability for intelligent life to develop on such a planet
pc= Probability for the civilization to broadcast across space:
Note that the formation of a suitable planet requires the host star to have sucient
metallicity, preferably in the range [Fe/H], 2[ 1;0:5] (Zackrisson et al. 2016). The
peak formation probability for terrestrial planets to form is [Fe/H]  1 according
to this model. Formally, a star with too low metallicity, [Fe/H] . 2, does not
have the heavy elements required (above He) for Earth-like planets to form. Since
these heavier elements were not formed as a result of the Big Bang, these are in-
stead produced via nucleosynthesis (Anand et al. 2018; Jones 2019) inside the stars.
Lineweaver (2001) describes a "Goldilocks selection eect", where a too low metal-
licity makes Earth-like planets unable to form, while too high metallicities increase
the chance of the formation of giant planets, which in early stages can destroy the
formation of smaller Earth-like planets. A comparison between three dierent mod-
els for the probabilities of terrestrial planet formation depending on the host stars
metallicity can be seen in Fig. 1 in Zackrisson et al. (2016). This could be used
to extend the project in terms of making a comparison for how dierent planets
evolve, depending on the metallicity of their host star. Note, however, that in the
simulation used in this project, we assume all stars to be sun-like with metallicities
[Fe/H]'0.
The parameters in focus are plandpiwhich we represent by four evolution indices.
Assume that all stars are solar like, with suitable planets surrounding them, hence,
factorsppandnEequals 1. Also assume a civilisation located on a habitable planet
(later referred to as an evolution index 3 planet) inside the galaxy. The civilisation
is technologically developed (a Type I civilisation in the description of Kaku 2008)
and is able to travel to nearby stars within the lifetime of an average human with
an assumed limit distance of rt= 10 pc. Based on plandpi, four evolution indices
are dened as Enwithn= 0;1;2;3, describing the state of evolution for the planet
around a star. At the start of the simulation, the stars begin at evolution index
E0. At each time step, the probability for an evolution index to increase by one is
P(En!En+1) = dt=Tprocess , where dtis the time step, Tprocess is the mean time for
the evolution index to increase by one and d t=Tprocess is on the form of a Poisson
distribution. The average times and denitions of the evolution indices are presented
in Table 2.1.
Furthermore, random numbers are generated each time step which work as switches
between the indices. The random numbers (written as RN), are chosen from a
17
2.2. THEORY CHAPTER 2. GALACTIC CIVILISATIONS
uniform distribution using Python's Random package1. IfRN<dt=Tprocess , the index
will increase one step and the planet evolves. The conditions n2 and the distance
d<r tmust be fullled in the targeted star for the civilisation to be able to spread
there, since a lower evolution index would make the planet impossible to inhabit
and a larger distance too far away.
2.2.2 Stochastic manipulation
The evolution indices are based on letting the random number RNbecome smaller
than a certain value d t=Tprocess which corresponds to a Poisson distribution on the
form,P(t) =e (t t0). Hereis a rate parameter and t t0is the time since
the beginning of the simulation. Generally, the probability for this is low since
the time step d tTprocess . Regardless, using many number of iterations makes
the indices increase and reach the nal index 3 state, even for small t t0. We
can manipulate this to make the evolutionary processes (the increase of indices)
of planets to match the evolutionary processes on Earth, where Earth's process
times can be seen in Table 2.1. To match these evolution processes, we make the
probability for RN<dt=Tprocess become larger in the limit where the time since the
last index increase approaches Tprocess . An extension of the Poisson distribution, in
terms of equation (2.3), increases this probability as tn 1 !Tprocess and follows
P(En!En+1) =dt
Tntn 1
TnN
; (2.3)
whereTn=Tprocess withn= 0;1;2;3 representing the dierent evolution indices,
tn 1is the time since arriving at previous evolution index and Nis a steepness
parameter. Note that for N= 0, the Poisson distribution is returned. For N >
0 andTntn 1, the probability for an evolution index increase is small, but
increases as tn 1 !Tn. By increasing N, the \boosting" of the probabilities can
be altered, since it steepens the probability distribution. Hence, the factor Ncan be
manipulated such that the indices Enare reached in correspondence with the values
in Table 2.1. For all scenarios we consider, P(En!En+1) is small.
Note that a small value of Nrepresents the evolution of a planet that deviates in its
evolutionary patterns compared to Earth while a large Nmakes the planet evolve
in coherence Earth's time scales. The steepness parameter can therefore be used to
compare how planets evolve if we assume that planets evolves similar to an Earth-
like planet or dierently. This could also be achieved by changing the Tprocess values
in Table 2.1 such that it matches the desired way of planetary evolution.
2.2.3 Abiogenesis and evolution states
Abiogenesis describes the theory that organisms can arise spontaneously from inan-
imate matter and is the basis for the assumed Tprocess in the model. According to
1Note that these numbers are not truly random but instead called pseudo-random numbers.
These are generated using deterministic processes. More information about pseudo-random num-
bers can be found in Kennedy (2020)
18
2.2. THEORY CHAPTER 2. GALACTIC CIVILISATIONS
Table 2.1: A table describing the dierent evolution indices used in the script.
Since the spreading of civilisations in general occurs several times, the Tprocess is set
totfor index2, indicating the dierent times this happens over the simulation
period.
Index Description Colour ShapeTprocess [Gyr]
0 A suitable planet in the habitable zone Red star -
1 Life development Cyan star 0.3
2 Habitable conditions for a civilisation* Olive green star 3.5
3 Intelligent life Navy blue star 0.7
2 Close encountering star with habitable conditions Red circle t
*The habitable conditions are based on that a stable oxygen level has been maintained on the planet such that a
civilisation can live there without any extra equipment.
the model in Spiegel and Turner (2011), the probability per unit time for life to
develop around a suitable star within its lifetime in the main sequence ( tmin= 0
andtmax10 Gyr)2is given by a Poisson distribution. This means life must evolve
within the interval t2[tmin;tmax] and that life occurs from a single process (as
an on/o switch) despite it probably being far more complex. This model states
that life arose at least once (and begun the process of life development) 3.8 billion
years ago (Ga), with an uncertainty of a few hundred million years. In comparison,
the paper of Dodd et al. (2017), claims that the rst life form might have arisen
earlier. They have compared lament tubes found in seaoor hydrothermal vents
with microfossils living in younger rocks. The consistency in the comparison yielded
the promising results that biological activity in these seaoor vents could have been
active up to almost 4.3 Ga. This means that life might have arisen without the
need for oxygen and that organisms thrived on other energy sources, such as the
chemical reactions close to a hydrothermal vent via chemosynthesis (Anand et al.
2018). However, for more complex life to exist, sucient oxygen levels seem to be
of main importance. The current level of oxygen in our atmosphere is a direct by-
product of the photosynthesis of cyanobacteria which according to Caneld et al.
(2000) reached its current level between 0.54 - 1.0 Ga.
The algorithm used for the probability of evolution index increase is based on the
on/o model from a Poisson distribution and is more rmly described in section
3.3. The life development time follows the claims of Dodd et al. (2017) with the
oxygen development time in the interval given by Caneld et al. (2000). The third
evolution index is based on the \rest" time, which all added should equal the age
of Earth (4:5 Gyr). Note that, in reality, there could be overlap between the
processes. Although the rst life form emerged around 300 million years after the
formation of Earth, the process of oxygen development might not have occurred
until several hundreds of million years after. But the simulation requires xed times
for the processes to work as switches between indices and thus, the potential overlap
is unconsidered.
2For Sun-like stars.
19
Chapter 3
Algorithm and Method
3.1 Background
In this chapter, the general algorithms are described in terms of pseudo-codes. The
algorithm will be divided into two parts:
1. Galactic dynamics and close encounters
2. Abiogenises using Monte Carlo methods (called \Galactic civilisation"),
where the rst aims to describe the script setup for the epicycle motion of stars
around the solar neighborhood inside the dened box. The second part aims towards
simulating life-developing processes for close encountering stars regarding:
Life development
Oxygen development
Technological civilisations.
Note that the algorithm is based on generating pseudo-random numbers using Python's
np.random.rand(). This means that each time the script is run, a new outcome of
the result is obtained. To get equal results each time, the seed of the random num-
ber generators can be set to some value by using the random.seed() command in
the beginning of the simulation. This is only needed if it is desired to get the same
output each time the code is run (Kennedy 2020).
3.2 Galactic dynamics
The dynamics of stars follow the equations found in section 1.2.1, with the equations
of motion seen in equation (1.12). The code aims to introduce a certain amount
of stars, measured in the frame of the galaxy, that move in the also moving box
around the solar neighborhood, having periodic boundaries in the azimuth. The
starting position of stars, R0and0, phases'and'zand amplitudes aandbare
randomly selected in their intervals (stated in section 1.2.3) with the latter two
20
3.3. GALACTIC CIVILISATION CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHM AND METHOD
taken from a right-sided Gaussian distribution. The Euclidean distances between
the stars are calculated for each time step over the given amount of time. A limit
distance is set to dene close encounters and the pairs of close encounters are put in a
specic list. Note that gravity between stars is neglected throughout the simulation.
The nal code can plot the oscillations in R,andz, nd all close encounters for
every iteration throughout the given amount of time, animate the motion of stars in
Cartesian coordinates and plot the convergence of the number of iterations needed
such that no close encounters are disregarded.
A pseudo-code for this can be described as
1. Dene a function starmotion depending on the number of stars, time and the
number of iterations used. This function will return desired plots and values
in the end.
2. Dene lists to include the motions in R,,z,xandyand set a limit distance
called toleranceradius for close encounters (10 pc for this specic project).
3. Dene the boundaries of the box as in Table 1.1.
4. Optional*: To get the same result every time the script runs, include a seed
value using the command np.random.seed(x) , for a xed integer value x.
5. Dene the random parameters using np.random.rand() for the starting posi-
tion of all stars and np.random.normal() for the amplitudes. Also dene the
orbital frequencies seen in equation (1.13).
6. Create a list of all possible pairs of stars, named pairlist, on the form:
(1;2);(1;3);:::(2;3);(2;4);:::;(i;j) of length Ns(Ns 1)=2, for the number of
starsNs. These pairs will be matched with the close encountering stars in
starlist , dened in point 8.
7. ForNsstars over all iterations, loop over the equations for R,zandR
in equations (1.12) and (1.16) respectively and insert their positions in a list
called totalist on the form Ai= [[Ri;zi;Rii]], whereidenotes the star
considered.
8. Calculate the euclidean distance between all stars over all iterations inside the
loop using the command np.pdist and insert the stars whose distances are
smaller than the toleranceradius ,rt, in a new list called starlist . Empty
the list after each step to save memory and return the wished list. pairlist
is used here to keep track of which stars that will be inserted in starlist .
9. Run the function for some amount of stars ,time anditerations .
3.3 Galactic civilisation
The method is based on the Drake equation, seen in equation (2.1). The code will
determine which stars are considered habitable or not, using indices called evolution
indices. The meaning of each index can be seen in Table 2.1. A pseudo-random num-
21
3.3. GALACTIC CIVILISATION CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHM AND METHOD
ber is generated each iteration and compared to the probabilities of index increase,
described in section 2.2.1. If the random number is smaller than this probability, the
index increases by one. The rst star to reach an evolution index of three represents
the rst planet with an intelligent civilisation. This star is checked for all close en-
countering stars with an evolution index of two. If the two close encountering stars
follow those requirements, the civilisation can spread. Over time, as more planets
develop intelligent civilisations, the same procedure is done on all these planets to
track the spreading of every civilisation through the galaxy.
The code can output the evolution indices of each star and a list over the spread of
stars in tuples on the form ( x;y) where the civilisation travels from star xtoyat time
t. Furthermore, the process can be animated in the 2D Cartesian plane representing
the plane of the galaxy around its guiding center. The stars change color depending
on their current evolution index and symbol if their planet is colonized according to
the colors and symbols in Table 2.1. Furthermore, the code can be used to check
to what extent the box becomes dominated by a single spreading civilisation in
comparison to multiple stationary civilisations that stay on their home planets. It
can also be used to investigate how this fraction depends on the number of stars
given and how the fraction changes when varying the steepness parameter.
1. Optional*: To get the same result every time the script runs, include a seed
value using the command np.random.seed(x) , for a xed integer value x.
2. Create a list, equally long as the number of stars given and generate a pseudo-
random number for each position in the list. The command can be
np.random.rand(N) , forNsstars.
3. Loop this list over all iterations and give the probability after each iteration
for a star to increase its current evolution index. The probability is given by
dt=Tprocess where dtis the time step and Tprocess is the average time it takes for
the planet to increase its evolution index by one. Put these in a separate list
called indexlist . Append the stars with indices 1, 2 and 3 in three dierent
lists.
4. Loop over the evolution indices and use dierent probabilities between the
dierent evolution indices from Table 2.1. If the random number RN<
dt=Tprocess , increase the index by one.
5. Dene a variable found=False . Append the rst star with evolution index 3
into a list and change found=True . Also dene a new list spread_stars which
colonized stars are to be appended in.
6. Loop over all the close encountering pairs obtained in the starlist from
section 3.2. If found=True and if the star checked is in spread_stars , append
it into a list called habitablelist . Check if the 0:th position of the pair of
stars is not in spread_stars , if so, reverse the pair of stars to get the right
order (inhabited star in 0:th position in tuple travels to 1:st position in the
tuple) and append into habitablelist . Also constrain this to only be valid
for stars with Enwheren= 2 for the conditions to be met. Repeat the same
22
3.3. GALACTIC CIVILISATION CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHM AND METHOD
procedure for the 1:th position in the pair of stars.
7. For comparison, check the dierence of the spreading of civilisations if the
planets instead use the probability distribution seen in equation (2.3), thus,
if the planets evolve in coherence to an Earth-like planet, redo the simulation
but change the probability d t=Tprocess to the distribution in equation (2.3) and
vary the value of N. The larger the N, the narrower the distribution will be
and the more the transition times between indices will happen according to
the process times of Earth.
To measure the fraction of colonized planets by a single spreading civilisation com-
pared to the number of planets naturally developing a civilisation, the following
pseudo-code can be used:
1. Dene a list called civindex with length of the number of stars considered,
consisting of zeros. Dene a variable called civcount and set it to zero outside
the time loop. Also dene a list called index3list which keeps track of the
stars that have reached an evolution index of three.
2. Loop through index3list . If a star reaches index 3 and is not already in
that list, append that star into the list. At the same time, increase civcount
by one and append that into civindex . Now, if e.g. star number 53 is the
rst star to reach an evolution index of three, this is put as the rst item in
index3list . Since we know that it is star number 53 that was the rst star
to reach this index, civindex will have a value one in position 53 in the list.
The next star value appended into index3list will put a value of two in that
star value position in civindex . In this way, every star becomes unique, with
its value governed by the civcount.
3. Check if the rst civilisation found already is in spread_stars . If it is not,
it means that the civilisation on that star will spread to the 1:st position of
its pair from starlist . Put these now colonized stars in civindex . This
will put values of \ones" in the position of the planets colonized by the single
spreading civilisation in civindex .
4. Check the number of stars colonized by the rst civilisation (hence, the number
of \ones" in civindex ) divided by the rest of the index 3 stars that the rst
civilisation has not colonized (the values that are not \ones" in civindex )
in every iteration and plot against time. Also, test this for varying steepness
parameterN= 0 andN= 3 for 200, 600 and 1000 stars.
The packages used for the code and animations are
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import matplotlib.animation as animation
from array import *
import random
from scipy import *
from scipy.spatial.distance import pdist
23
3.3. GALACTIC CIVILISATION CHAPTER 3. ALGORITHM AND METHOD
from matplotlib import cm, colors, pyplot as plt
from IPython.display import HTML
import copy
import ffmpeg
24
Chapter 4
Results
4.1 Background
This chapter presents the results obtained from the simulations made in chapter 3
along with brief discussions. The rst part quanties and displays the oscillation
magnitudes from the epicycle motions for a simulation time of 1 Gyr together with
the Cartesian motion of one star in the galactic plane. It also shows the results
of nding the convergence parameter d twith a supplied table describing properties
about close encountering stars. Lastly, results from the animation of close encoun-
tering stars are shown together with six illustrative screenshots.
The second part states the time it takes for the rst star to reach an evolution index of
three, depending on the change of the steepness parameter Nfrom section 2.2.2. The
realism of these times is briey discussed in comparison to the evolutionary patterns
on Earth. The change of evolution index when allowing all civilisations to spread can
also be seen. Finally, only the rst developed civilisation was allowed to spread and
colonize index 2 planets in the galaxy. The rest of the civilisations developing around
index 3 stars stay stationary at their home planets. The fraction between colonized
planets by the single traveling civilisation and the planets colonized by the stationary
civilisations are measured over time, depending on the steepness parameter Nand
the number of stars considered.
4.2 Galactic dynamics
Figure 4.1 displays the radial oscillation for a star around the equilibrium orbit
R0where the total radial oscillation magnitude is 0:7 kpc. Since the starting
positionsR0, phase', and amplitude ais chosen randomly within the boundaries,
the oscillation magnitude will be dierent for each star. The average magnitude of
oscillation for 1000 stars is R1:1 kpc over 1 Gyr. Note that the oscillation does
not change over time since we follow stars motion in the galactic potential, assuming
perturbations from the potential have already happened.
25
4.2. GALACTIC DYNAMICS CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.1: A plot illustrating the radial oscillations for a star in an epicyclic orbit
as a function of time, with an oscillating amplitude of 0:7 kpc.
The azimuthal motion, described by R(t) in equation (1.16), is depicted in Figure
4.2. The motion describes the box of stars moving linearly with !0tthrough space
with the oscillating motion of the stars relative to the center of the box. Since
Rdepends on several stochastic parameters, the resulting motion of each star is
dierent. Note that the motion of the box itself is for convenience since the stars
would be moving quickly through the box otherwise. The mean value of azimuthal
motion relative to the center of the box is 1.4 kpc.
Figure 4.3 shows the vertical motion for one star inside the box. The star oscillates
around the galactic plane with a mean magnitude of 0.6 kpc. Also here, the randomly
chosen amplitude band frequency yields dierent outcomes for each star. It can
be seen that stars on average tend to oscillate more vertically then radially, thus,
that the frequency is larger than . Since each of the orbital frequencies !,and
depends on R0, it is indeed in correspondence with equation (1.13) that  > for
a star starting at position R0.
The motion in Cartesian coordinates is shown in Figure 4.4 for one star. Each
star moves in unique patterns inside the box which is illustrated in the animation
screenshots in Figure A.1 in Appendix A. The motion becomes complex since it
oscillates in each direction but is simplied in the screenshots where we disregard
any vertical motions. The resulting motion in ( R;) follows retrograde motion in
an ellipse with prograde motion in its guiding center. Retrograde motion1can make
stellar objects appear to stop and move backward under some time in a moving
reference frame. In the case of this simulation, since the motion of stars is relative
1An example is Earth- and Mars's orbit relative to each other. Since Earth orbits approximately
two times as fast as Mars, mapping the tangential line of sight position of Mars in orbit gives an
illusion of Mars stopping and moving backwards relative to Earth at certain times.
26
4.2. GALACTIC DYNAMICS CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.2: A plot illustrating the azimuthal motion of two stars relative to the
center of the box. Note the dierence between the motion of the two stars. The
motion inRdepends on several stochastic parameters (equation 1.16) which
makes the outcome of each star unique. Since the motion is seen relative to the
center of the moving box, the retrograde motion of one star can be seen as it appears
to \turn" along its orbit.
Figure 4.3: A plot illustrating the vertical oscillation over time for one star. The
mean vertical amplitude of oscillation considering 1000 stars is 0.6 kpc, but is, due
to the random amplitude b, frequency and phaze'zdierent for each star.
27
4.2. GALACTIC DYNAMICS CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.4: A gure displaying the Cartesian motion of one star considering the
x=Rcos () R0andy=Rsin () motions in the plane, disregarding any
vertical oscillations. Since the motion is relative to the center of the box, at a
distanceR0from the galactic center, the  R0term is included. Notice that the
orbits of stars are also followed outside the box, hence the range on the x-axis is
extended compared to the values seen in Table 1.1.
to the center of the moving box, the stars sometimes appear to have this motion.
If the orbital angular momentum vector of the object is in the opposite direction
compared to the orbit, it is called prograde motion of its guiding center (Van Den
Bosch 2020).
It is important to note the assumption made when tracing the orbits of stars in
this simulation. By increasing simulation time (as done in section 4.3), the motion
of stars can change. Here we assume that the epicycle motion of stars are non-
changing over time as they move in the galactic potential. As the galaxy evolves,
many phenomena can aect the motion of the included stars. This could be e.g
merging with other galaxies which can cause stripping eects, changing the orbits of
the stars or gravitational perturbations, which could alter the oscillating motions.
By increasing the number density of stars considered, the number of close encounters
increases. Table 4.1 displays the maximum amount of close encounters found running
the code four times for each star count with a limit radius of 10 pc. The convergence
can be seen in Figure 4.5 plotting the average number of close encounters2as a
function of the number of time steps used over the xed time of 1 Gyr. The standard
deviations can be seen as vertical lines for the dierent curves and are calculated
for each number of stars in Table 4.1. Moreover, the table also states the fraction
between all close encounters found and the total amount of possible pairs of stars,
f=Nclose=Npossible , whereNpossible =N(N 1)=2, denoting stars as N. This fraction
2Formally, the mean value of the number of close encounters for all iterations, run four times.
28
4.2. GALACTIC DYNAMICS CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Table 4.1: A table showing the average amount of close encounters found over
the time of 1 Gyr, depending on the number of stars given. Here, maxdenotes the
maximum standard deviation found and fthe fraction between close encounters and
all possible pairs of stars.
Stars Ave. Close encounters for 50 000 iterations maxf
400 516 8:3 % 0.6 %
600 1148 6:2 % 0.6 %
800 2012 4:7 % 0.6 %
1000 3113 4:5 % 0.6 %
Figure 4.5: A plot showing the average number of close encounters against the
number of iterations per Gyr. The limit distance is set to 10 pc and the relations
are shown for 400- up to 1000 stars in steps of 200. The convergence for all numbers
of stars tested, occurs at 10000 iterations or equally, a time step of 0.01 Myr
with the standard deviation shown as error bars on each of the plots. The standard
deviation follows the regular =qP(xi xmean)2
NwithNdenoting the total amount
of stars considered.
is the same for the dierent star counts which means that the number of iterations
tested, is enough to nd every close encountering pair. Since close encounters of two
pairs of stars rarely happen more than one time per Gyr3, the few pairs that do are
neglected.
Finally, the mean distance between the close encounters was determined to be 7.6
pc. The average distance between the stars in general was 82, 47 and 36 pc for 200,
600 and 1000 stars respectively. Assuming Sun-like stars, with velocities according
toVin equation (1.14), the average velocity was V(t)237 kpc/Gyr. This yields
a centripetal acceleration between the stars, using equation (1.1), of order 2 10 7
kpc/Gyr2.
3Two pairs of stars can be closer than the limit distance many times over some adjacent itera-
tions but is then only counted once. They can also encounter each other more than one time over
the full time and those encounters are the ones that are neglected.
29
4.2. GALACTIC DYNAMICS CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
(e)
 (f)
Figure 4.6: A gure showing screenshots of 6 iterations for the animation of the
epicycle motion of 100 stars. The purpose is to show how the number of close
encounters increases over time. In this simulation, 1 time unit = 1 Myr with the
blue dots indicating stars that under some iteration had a close encounter. The rst
close encountering stars are found after 150 Myr and continue to increase over
time. Note that the same star can be close to more than one star in the time of
the simulation, which explains why there are an uneven number of stars in some
screenshots. This is seen in (b)where one of the three stars in the rst pair created,
formed a new close encounter with the third star.
Screenshots of the animation made from section 3.2 can be seen in Figure 4.6. The
six gures indicate how the number of close encounters increases with time. The
limit distance rtis set to 10 pc and the blue circles represent any two stars that at
some point in time have been closer than rt. Each time frame represents 1 Myr and
the simulation is run over 1 Gyr. After 800 Myr, 14 close encountering stars had
been recorded, with the rst ones appearing at the 150 Myr mark. The time step
is not set to be optimized throughout this animation due to computing limitations.
Nevertheless, it demonstrates how the number of close encounters increases with
time. The full animation can be found in the links in Appendix A.
30
4.3. GALACTIC CIVILISATIONS CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.3 Galactic civilisations
Figure 4.7: A histogram showing times for the rst planet to reach an evolution
indexE3. Here, dtis chosen to the optimized value of 1/10000 Gyr (obtained in
section 4.2) and the steepness parameter Nfrom equation (2.3) is varied. The times
were determined to 270 Myr,3:65 Gyr and4:8 Gyr forN= 0,N= 3 and
N= 1000 respectively. The simulation was made with 200 stars.
For the convergence parameters d t= 10 4Gyr, the average time it takes for the
rst planet to develop intelligent life, hence have an evolution index E3is shown in
Figure 4.7. For N= 0, the rst intelligent civilisation developed after 270 Myr.
The short time is due to the broadness of the Poisson distribution when neglecting
the steepness parameter. An expected value would be 4:5 Gyr for all the necessary
life developing processes to have occurred, if the evolutionary time scales happen
according to the ones on Earth.
The extended probability distribution gave results more coherent with the process
times in Table 2.1. For N= 3, the average time to reach E3was3:65 Gyr and
forN= 1000, 4.8 Gyr. Compared to an Earth-like planet, N= 1000 seems the
most reasonable as it compares to the evolution times for such a planet. However, we
want the model to vary somewhat in time scales in comparison to Earth. The N= 3
model seems to do this, since the time scales is similar to the ones on Earth, but still
leaves room for \unusual events4" to occur. Since the only known planet to have
developed life is Earth, its time scales are considered most reasonable. Nonetheless,
other planets could have dierent processes for the development of life which in term
could alter the process times signicantly.
Figure 4.8.a shows the development of evolution indices for 200 stars over 12 Gyr.
Comparing the results to Table 2.1, there is clear correspondence. The process time
4Evolution time scales that are unlike the ones on Earth
31
4.3. GALACTIC CIVILISATIONS CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)The change in evolution indices over
12 Gyrs for 200 stars when allowing every
civilisation to spread between stars. The
simulation is made with time step d t=
10 4and steepness parameter N= 0.
(b)The change in evolution indices over
12 Gyrs for 200 stars when allowing ev-
ery civilisation to spread between stars.
The simulation is made with timestep d t=
10 4and steepness parameter N= 3.
Figure 4.8: A comparison between the change of evolution indices for 200 stars
over 12 Gyr. The blue dash-dotted line shows index 1 stars, the orange dashed line
index 2 stars and the lled green index 3 stars. In (b), a steepness parameter of
N= 3 has been added, giving the characteristic eect of narrowing the spread of
indices since the probability distribution becomes more narrow.
forE0!E1is small, formally, 0.3 Gyr, meaning most of the stars will reach this
value soon after the start of the simulation. By 1 Gyr, index 1 stars reach their
maximum with a few index 2 and 3 stars. The small peak for index 2 stars is a
direct result of d t=Tprocess being much smaller than for the other indices. Due to the
largeTprocess , the jump from E1!E2requires the random number, RN<2:8510 5
compared to P(E0!E1) = 3:310 4andP(E2!E3) = 1:410 4. This implies the
low peak of the index 2 stars identied in the graph in addition to the fast increase
of index 3 stars as soon as the index 2 and index 1 stars starts to reduce. The few
index 2 stars are also a result of the colonization of those planets. Since index two
stars can either be colonized by a civilisation or jump up in index naturally over
time, the index 2 stars start to decrease quickly as soon as index 3 stars begin to
dominate. The results also show that disregarding the steepness parameter yields a
larger \mix" of planets with dierent indices over time.
When adding the steepness parameter N= 3 from equation (2.3), the indices in-
crease in a less random sense. The narrower distribution allow the indices to stay
in their current states longer, since the probability P(En!En+1) is small for small
values oftn 1. This can be seen in Figure 4.8.b where every star have reached E1
before any of them have jumped to E2. As time reaches 1:8 Gyr, the probability
for index increase is around RN<3:510 6and increases for larger tn 1, where the
rst index 2 stars are seen. The rst index 3 stars are found after 3:8 Gyr. The
dierence in steepness between Figure (a)compared to (b)represents the value of
N. ForN1, every star would jump up (or down) in index at the same time since
tn 1would have to be extremely close to Tnfor the evolution index to increase.
32
4.3. GALACTIC CIVILISATIONS CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.9: Two histograms showing the number of colonized planets per civil-
isation on the vertical axis and the civilisation number Cin rising order on the
horizontal axis. Here, C= 0;1;2;3;:::;n whereC= 1 denotes the rst developed
civilisation and nstands for the last civilisation to develop on a planet. The left
panel depicts this for a steepness parameter N= 0 and the right panel N= 3.
Note that in the case of N= 3, the rst few developed civilisations dominate while
forN= 0, there is a more uniform distribution between colonized planets. The
simulation is performed considering 1000 stars.
Since we can trace which civilization colonized which planet5, we can also examine
the advantage of early development over late development, in terms of how many
planets each civilisation have colonized. Note that each civilization is allowed to
spread to planets around the index 2 stars, but once a planet has been colonized,
another civilization cannot spread there6. Figure 4.9 shows how many planets each
civilisation has colonized as a function of its civilization number C. The civilisation
number increases sequentially, with C= 1 being the rst civilisation to develop
(hence, for the planet to reach index 3) and C=nbeing the last civilisation to
develop. The maximum number of colonized planets, nmax, is the number of stars
considered and is set to 1000 in this case. If C= 0, it means that this star has
neither reached index 3 nor has it been colonized. Studying both cases for the inclu-
sion and exclusion of the steepness parameter N, the second developed civilisation
colonized most planets with 21 planets for N= 0 and 222 planets for N= 3. For
N= 0 it should be noted that over 400 civilisations either evolved naturally on
their planet or also spread to other planets. Because of the broadness of the Poisson
distribution, the time interval in which index 2 stars are available for colonization is
considerably longer than if the steepness parameter is included. However, they count
only a few at each time step, since the indices change their values more randomly.
This means that index 2 stars are still available for colonization, even when the late
civilisations develop. Note, however, that most of the late developed civilisations
have only colonized one planet, the planet on which they evolved.
5Since they all have a certain value dened in \civindex" in section 3.3
6Conversely, once a civilisation has colonized a planet, it immediately jumps up to index 3.
Therefore there cannot be two civilisations on the same planet simultaneously.
33
4.3. GALACTIC CIVILISATIONS CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
ForN= 3 the transition times between indices are exceedingly narrower which
means that indices stay in their current states longer (formally, they stay in their
states for time tTn). This means that the moment the rst civilisation develops,
almost all other stars is in the second index state. This provides high probabilities for
the civilisation to nd close encountering stars to colonize. Since the civilisations are
allowed to spread to unlimited amount of close encounters each time step, the spread
increases exponentially which leave few planets for the late-developing civilisations
to colonize. In general, since there are more planets available to colonize for the
early civilisations, they become dominant.
Figure 4.10 shows the degree of which the galaxy becomes dominated by only al-
lowing a single civilisation to spread and colonize planets compared to planets only
developing stationary civilisations. The civilisation that can spread between plan-
ets is seen as Nspreading while the planets with a stationary civilisation is seen as
Nstationary . IfNspreading=Nstationary>1, the single civilisation is dominant, hence,
has colonized more planets than there exists planets with stationary civilisations.
Studying the graph where N= 0, the single civilisation is never dominant in the
fraction. This can be explained by studying the screenshots from the animation in
Figure 4.11. We can see that excluding the steepness parameter makes the index
2 stars jump very quickly up to index 3. This means that there is very little time
for the single civilisation to meet close encountering index 2 stars. By this mean,
the number of stars \naturally7" reaching evolution index 3 begins to dominate.
Note that the single civilisation is not allowed to spread to stars already stationary
colonized. Studying Figure 4.11.b, it can be seen that there are very few index 2
stars in comparison to index 3 stars. After 12 Gyr almost all of the planets are
inhabited by stationary civilisations where only 3 out of the 1000 planets, 4 out of
the 600 planets, and 2 out of the 200 planets are colonized by the single civilisation.
ForN= 3 however, the results are dierent. Indeed, for 200 and 600 stars, the
stationary civilisations still dominate having 85 per cent of the planets colonized
for 200 stars and 66 per cent for 600 stars at the end of the simulation. For
1000 stars, the single civilisation becomes the dominant since there are enough close
encountering index 2 stars for the civilisation to spread to. When studying Figure
4.12 (despite it showing less stars with a much larger time step), the transition
time between indices of stars is much shorter in comparison to Figure 4.11 due to
the included steepness parameter. Since all stars have reached index 2 at the time
when the rst civilisation develops, the chance of them nding a close encountering
star is large, because the large number of stars considered makes the mean distance
between the stars to be small. As the number of stars increases, also the mean
distance between the stars decreases and the probability for the single civilisation
to encounter a close enough star grows.
In Figure 4.11, an animation over the spreading of a single civilisation can be seen
where the dierent colors and symbols change according to Table 2.1. Here, Nin
equation (2.3) is set to zero. Note that the rst index 3 stars (and also the rst
7Naturally means the stars which have developed a stationary civilisation and not been colonized
by another civilisation.
34
4.3. GALACTIC CIVILISATIONS CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.10: The graph illustrates the fraction of planets colonized when only a
single civilisation is able to travel between stars, while the other civilisations stay
stationary on their home planets. Nspreading describes the planets colonized by the
single civilisation and Nstationary are the planets colonized by stationary civilisations.
The left plot displays the fraction for 200, 600 and 1000 stars for steepness parameter
N= 3 and the right shows this for N= 0. Note that if Nspreading=Nstationary>1, the
single civilisation dominates. It can be seen that only for 1000 stars with N= 3, the
single civilisation has colonized more planets than there are planets with stationary
civilisations. The convergence seen in the graphs is when there are no more planets
to colonize, hence, when every star has reached evolution index 3. Note that the
simulation in the right panel begins at time 3 Gyr. This is the time when the rst
civilisation has developed.
civilisations, seen as navy blue in Figure 4.11.b) evolves at roughly time = 100
which for this animation is approximately 240 Myr (d t= 2.4 Myr). The spread
of indices propagates until all stars have reached this level. After 9:6 Gyr, the
rst colonization of planets by the traveling civilisation happens and continues to
5 planets after the total time of 12 Gyr. Note the large time step of 2.4 Myr
which makes the somewhat animation unrealistic. The optimal time step of 0.1 Myr
would yield more spreading between stars in a shorter time since none of the close
encountering stars would be overlooked. Due to limited computing power, this could
not be achieved, however, it still works well for illustrating motion of stars, show
how the planets evolve and to see how a civilisation spreads between planets.
An inclusion of the steepness parameter N= 3 can be seen in Figure 4.12. The
animation shows clear transition times between the indices. In comparison to Figure
4.11, every star reaches a certain evolution index before increasing to the next. This
is a direct result of the manipulation of the Poisson distribution where a larger N
makes the probability of transition times increase as t t0 !Tn. The rst index 1
stars are found after 600 Myr, where all of the stars have reached this state after
1:8 Gyr. Index 2 stars have started to evolve on the 2.4 Gyr mark and reached
its maximum at 3.6 Gyr. This is in close coherence with the values of Table 2.1,
where the oxygen development process takes 3:9 Gyr. After 7.4 Gyr, all stars
have reached index 3 and after 12 Gyr, the civilisation has spread to 7 planets.
35
4.3. GALACTIC CIVILISATIONS CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
(e)
 (f)
(g)
 (h)
Figure 4.11: An illustration over the evolution of indices for 200 stars and the
colonization of the rst developed civilisation. Index 0 stars are seen as red stars,
index 1 stars as light blue, index 2 stars as olive green, index 3 stars as navy blue
and the colonized stars by one civilisation are seen as red circles. The steepness
parameter is set to N= 0. The time stamps of the screenshots are chosen to
illustrate the times of transition, thus, when most of the stars increase in index.
The time step used is d t= 2:4 Myr and the time of the simulation is set to 12 Gyr.
36
4.3. GALACTIC CIVILISATIONS CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
(e)
 (f)
(g)
 (h)
Figure 4.12: An illustration over the evolution of indices for 200 stars and the
colonization of the rst developed civilisation. Index 0 stars are seen as red stars,
index 1 stars as light blue, index 2 stars as olive green, index 3 stars as navy blue
and the colonized stars by one civilisation are seen as red circles. The steepness
parameter is set to N= 3. The time stamps of the screenshots are chosen to
illustrate the times of transition, thus, when most of the stars increase in index.
In comparison to gure 4.11, there is very little mixing between the indices. This
is a result from the included steepness parameter which narrows the probability
distribution, making the chance of index increase small for times smaller than the
process times Tn. The time step used is d t= 2:4 Myr and the time of the simulation
is set to 12 Gyr.
37
Chapter 5
Discussions and conclusions
Realism, parameters and simulation results
To begin with, a successful representation of civilisations spreading across the galaxy
was obtained with several implied results such as the number of planets colonized, the
number of close encounters, and indices of star states in their evolutionary process.
The key parameters realized were the limit distance rt, and the process times Tprocess .
These parameters must be chosen to represent \realistic" values, despite their high
uncertainty. Space travel between stars has so far only been theoretically tackled
and the times to reach sub-relativistic travel speeds might be further or closer into
the future than one might think. The process times for index increase is based on
the abiogenesis (life development) of Earth. Other celestial objects or systems might
have completely other time scales and parameters for technological civilisations to
evolve. Many new systems with potentially habitable conditions are for example
found around M dwarfs, where the habitable zone lies closer to the host star than
on Earth (see Gillon et al. 2016). A planet closer to the star can imply higher
sources of radiation which could increase the time of organic development since it
is, for the majority of organisms, harder to adapt to radioactive environments. At
the same time however, since dwarf stars live signicantly longer than sun-like stars
(Bertulani 2013), they also have longer time to develop habitable conditions.
The uncertainties were tackled by introducing probabilities for the evolution process
of the stars, increasing their time intervals for undergoing its evolutionary processes.
One can here conclude that probabilities chosen without any steepness parameter
change the planets evolutionary time scales to be unlike Earth's, while the manip-
ulation of the steepness parameter N, described in section 2.2.2, directs the theory
towards Earth's uniqueness and that general life development happen according to
how life evolved here.
The comparison by planets colonized by a single spreading civilisation and multiple
stationary civilisations is seen in Figure 4.10. This shows that only for 1000 stars
with steepness parameter of N= 3, a single spreading civilisation dominates the
galaxy in comparison to several stationary civilisations. It is important to note that
the mean distance between stars, in this case, is smaller than for 600 and 200 stars.
38
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
This increases the probability for the single civilisation to nd close encountering
index 2 stars as they develop. The steepness parameter makes the transition times
between indices narrower. Every star has reached the state of index 2 before any
of them increases to index 3. Since the single spreading civilisation is chosen to be
the one on the rst developed index 3 star, it means that in the rst time step, the
majority of other stars are index 2 stars. Due to the smaller mean distance between
stars when considering 1000 stars, many of them become close encountering stars
to the civilisation. This means that the civilisation can start to spread almost
instantaneously. Once they have colonized a few planets, the number of planets
they can colonize increases exponentially, with an increase occurring faster than the
naturally developing stationary civilisations. This shows how dierent the outcomes
can be by only varying the number of stars included.
Despite that the single spreading civilisation is dominant in the galaxy for 1000
stars, the mean distance between stars with habitable planets is still signicant.
Examining 1000 stars, the mean separation is 36 pc which would - for a civilisation
traveling with fusion engines - take at least 150 years to travel to. This can be one
of the limiting factors to why civilisations choose not to spread across the galaxy,
since they would have to rely on waiting for close encountering stars before they can
travel.
Limitations and assumptions
It is important to note the assumptions made throughout the project. The epicycle
approximation is one (discussed in Appendix B), together with assumptions regard-
ing the civilisations and number of stars considered. The simulation was done with
a maximum of 1000 stars to reduce the computing time, but would optimally be
chosen from some real measurement of the average number of stars in the habitable
zone contained in a section of volume around the solar neighborhood as large as
in this project. Also, every civilisation is assumed to develop the same way, being
technical enough for space travel. Realistically, the development of civilisations on
the planets could be dierent, perhaps making only a fraction of them able to travel.
A more involved analysis could incorporate the ability for a civilisation to colonize
planets with lower indices than 2. Since the civilisation is assumed to be technolog-
ically developed, they could potentially develop techniques to survive in conditions
that is considered non-habitable as they evolve. As the civilisations develop, they
might invent ways to survive on a planet with e.g. lower oxygen levels compared to
Earth which in turn yields more possible planets to colonize.
Improvements and extension of the project
Improvements in the simulation would regard increasing the number of parameters
considered. Optimally, the switching between indices could be changed to some
more intricate model of how abiogenesis could develop dierently depending on the
location, structure, and chemical composition of the system. This would also imply
the extension of adding other types of stars than sun-like stars, perhaps consider-
ing potentially habitable exoplanets recently found. However, since the simulation
39
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
considers the Milky Way galaxy, we would still have the constraint of choosing stars
located in the solar neighborhood in our galaxy since the Milky Way potential is
used to derive the motion of the stars.
Philosophical viewing points
The Fermi's paradox may be a result of ethics; a civilisation with sucient technol-
ogy for space travel may not need to travel between stars. If ramjet fusion engines
are used, giving traveling speeds up to 77 % of the light speed (Kaku 2008), it
would still take at fastest 35 years to reach an average distant close encountering
star of 7.6 pc (without the concern of matching orbits when landing or travel fuel-
eciently) which might be a big constraint when considering space travel. If a lower
limit radius would be chosen for the civilisation, the times of travel would decrease
but also the stars falling into the category of being close encounters would decrease.
By virtue of the ethical aspect, extra-terrestrial life may not have been found by the
reason that they do not want to be found. Dissimilar to us on Earth, perhaps they
are not interested in the search for other life forms.
Conclusions
Using the epicycle approximation throughout the simulation yielded a useful model
of the motion of stars in the introduced section around the solar neighborhood. The
near-circular motion of stars in the galactic potential showed that stars tend to os-
cillate around their guiding center with approximately a 2:1 ratio radially compared
to vertically. Using the motion of stars to nd all stars counting as close encounters,
thus, have a separation distance of less than 10 pc, 0.6 per cent of all possible pairs
of stars where classied as close encounters. However, the motion of stars simulated
are assumed not to be aected by the evolution of the galaxy itself, which if included
could alter their orbits over time and change the number of stars counting as close
encounters.
The choice of the steepness parameter Nand the number of stars used in the sim-
ulation were crucial to reach several results. Changing this parameter can alter
the probability distributions governing the planetary evolution's. A large steepness
parameter forces the evolution of planets to happen according to the time scales
on Earth, which yields more habitable planets for the rst developed civilisation
to colonize in comparison to planets naturally developing civilisations that stays
stationary at their home planets, if the number of stars 1000. By excluding the
steepness parameter, this civilisation has not enough planets available for coloniza-
tion, making the stationary civilisations dominant after 12 Gyr of simulation time.
By varying such - and other external - parameters, the model can be used to sim-
ulate important properties of how galactic colonisation could occur in the galaxy.
If one would know relevant developing parameters in other galaxies, this simulation
could help to investigate how colonization between planets in the habitable zone
inside such a galaxy could happen. However, constraints such as using the epicycle
approximation for the motion of stars and considering another galactic potential
would still be limiting factors.
40
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
The motivation for this project was based on an interest in astrobiology and simu-
lation development, produced from theoretical models. It has developed new per-
spectives concerning future chances of galaxy spread and introduced several aspects
of how the patterns of evolution for civilisations could vary, depending on the sys-
tem in consideration. The project sheds light on important aspects in terms of
discovering extraterrestrial life in the future. This provides strong motivation for
the continuation of developing and extending the project in the future.
41
Appendix A
Animations
This Appendix include the screenshot images together with the links for the anima-
tions made. The three rst links corresponds to the screenshots seen Figure A.1 to
A.4. The 2 subsequent links are animations from two other runs of the script (hence
they dier a bit due to the random parameters, but uses the exact same code) with
the same parameters for the galactic civilisation, but with increased quality.
The animation for close encountering stars can be seen via the following link:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5_r0ZV6Pb3Y
The animation for the civilisation spread can be seen via the following links:
https://youtu.be/dVRbFwqwDU8 forN= 0
https://youtu.be/hkC3yvGfPuI forN= 3.
I recommend slowing the last two videos down to half speed since the time step used
in these animations is large. You can also view the videos with higher quality in the
links below.
The videos with higher quality can be seen via the following links:
https://youtu.be/R4FoQmKaoGk forN= 0.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BxjkVAdAWAM forN= 3.
42
APPENDIX A. ANIMATIONS
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
(e)
 (f)
Figure A.1: A gure showing screenshots of 6 consecutive iterations for the ani-
mation of the epicycle motion of 100 stars. The purpose is to show how stars move
in epicycle motion. In this simulation, 1 time unit = 1 Myr with the blue dots in-
dicating stars that under some iteration had a close encounter. Note that the same
star can be close to more than one star in the time of the simulation, which explains
why there are an uneven number of stars in some screenshots. This is seen in (b)
where one of the three stars in the rst pair created, formed a new close encounter
with the third star.
43
APPENDIX A. ANIMATIONS
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
(e)
 (f)
Figure A.2: A gure showing screenshots of 6 iterations for the animation of the
epicycle motion of 100 stars. The purpose is to show how the number of close
encounters increases over time. In this simulation, 1 time unit = 1 Myr with the
blue dots indicating stars that under some iteration had a close encounter. The rst
close encountering stars are found after 150 Myr and continue to increase over
time. Note that the same star can be close to more than one star in the time of
the simulation, which explains why there are an uneven number of stars in some
screenshots. This is seen in (b)where one of the three stars in the rst pair created,
formed a new close encounter with the third star.
44
APPENDIX A. ANIMATIONS
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
(e)
 (f)
(g)
 (h)
Figure A.3: An illustration over the evolution of indices for 200 stars and the
colonisation of the rst developed civilisation. Index 0 stars are seen as red stars,
index 1 stars as light blue, index 2 stars as olive green, index 3 stars as navy blue
and the colonized stars are seen as red ball shapes. The steepness parameter is set
toN= 0. The time stamps of the screenshots are chosen to illustrate the times of
transition, thus, when most of the stars increase in index. The time step used is
dt= 2:4 Myr and the time of the simulation is set to 12 Gyr.
45
APPENDIX A. ANIMATIONS
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
(e)
 (f)
(g)
 (h)
Figure A.4: An illustration over the evolution of indices for 200 stars and the
colonisation of the rst developed civilisation. Index 0 stars are seen as red stars,
index 1 stars as light blue, index 2 stars as olive green, index 3 stars as navy blue
and the colonized stars are seen as red ball shapes. The steepness parameter is set
toN= 3. The time stamps of the screenshots are chosen to illustrate the times of
transition, thus, when most of the stars increase in index. In comparison to gure
4.11, there is very little mixing between the indices. This is a result from the included
steepness parameter which narrows the probability distribution, making the chance
of index increase small for times smaller than the process times Tn. The time step
used is dt= 2:4 Myr and the time of the simulation is set to 12 Gyr.
46
Appendix B
Formal derivation of the epicyclic
approximation
The basic derivation is based on the work in Van Den Bosch (2020, page. 1-6) and
will more formally be derived here.
Assume a disk galaxy (for example the Milky Way) in cylindrical coordinates where
the azimuthal motion is a function of radius and vertical distance as  = ( R;z),
following Newton's equation of motion via
8
><
>:R R_2= @
@R
d
dt(R2_) = 0
z= @
@z; (B.1)
in cylindrical coordinates ( R;;z ). Here,Lz=R2_describes the conservation of
angular momentum and  @=@R and @=@zdescribes the coupled oscillations in
directionRandz. With an eective potential  e= +L2
z=2R2, this can be further
simplied to(R= @e
@R
z= @e
@z: (B.2)
The circular orbit of the system has a radius equal to the guiding centre R=R0.
For a small section around the guiding centre, the eective potential can be Taylor
expanded around ( R R0;y) = (0;0), yielding
e=  e(R0;0)+( x)x+( y)y+( xy)xy+1
2(xx)x2+1
2(yy)y2+O(xz2)+:::(B.3)
wherex=R R0. By the symmetry of R0; ( x;y;xy)j(R0;0)= 0. The epicycle
approximation holds up the second order with an eective potential dened as
e=  e(R0;0) +1
22x2+1
22y2(B.4)
47
APPENDIX B. FORMAL DERIVATION OF THE EPICYCLIC
APPROXIMATION
with the epicycle frequency and vertical frequency , dened as 2xx=
@2e=@x2and2xx=@2e=@y2. This yields the equation of motions in the
tangential plane symmetric around _(meridional plane)
(
x= 2x
y= 2y; (B.5)
where thex- andymotions are harmonic oscillations with the epicycle- and vertical
frequencies. The circular frequency is given by
!(R) =s
1
R@
@R
(Rg;0)=Lz
R2; (B.6)
which yields
2=@2e
@R2
(Rg;0)=
Rd!2
dR+ 4!2
: (B.7)
A galactic potential with a homogeneous mass distribution, = 2!and Kepler
potential,=!, for! <  < 2!yields the total motion as in equation (1.12),
obeying8
><
>:R(t) =R0+asin(t+')
(t) =0+!0t+2!0
R0acos(t+')
z(t) =bcos(t+'z): (B.8)
Validity
The validity and derivation of the epicycle approximation is only possible considering
roughly constant star density, especially in the zdirection as  z=2zmust imply (z)
to be constant. Also, by the use of a Taylor expansion around the guiding centre, the
radial extension around R0cannot be too large. For more formal calculations, the
star density should vary with Randz(and for exact calculations, also ), changing
the equations of motions used.
48
Bibliography
Anand, Mahesh et al. (2018). An introduction to astrobiology . 3rd ed. Cambridge
University Press.
Armstrong, Stuart and Anders Sandberg (Aug. 2013). \Eternity in six hours: Inter-
galactic spreading of intelligent life and sharpening the Fermi paradox". In: Acta
Astronautica 89, pp. 1{13. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2013.04.002 .
Aumer, Michael and James J Binney (2009). \Kinematics and history of the solar
neighbourhood revisited". In: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
397.3, pp. 1286{1301.
Bertulani, Carlos A. (2013). Nuclei in the Cosmos . World Scientic.
Caneld et al. (2000). \The Archean sulfur cycle and the early history of atmospheric
oxygen". In: Science 288.5466, pp. 658{661.
Carroll-Nellenback, Jonathan et al. (Aug. 2019). \The Fermi Paradox and the Au-
rora Eect: Exo-civilization Settlement, Expansion, and Steady States". In: The
Astronomical Journal 158.3, p. 117. issn: 1538-3881. doi:10.3847/1538-3881/
ab31a3 .url:http://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ab31a3 .
Cubarsi, Rafael (June 2013). \The epicycle model". In: Modelling in Science Edu-
cation and Learning 6, p. 171. doi:10.4995/msel.2013.1944 .
Dodd, Matthew S et al. (2017). \Evidence for early life in Earth's oldest hydrother-
mal vent precipitates". In: Nature 543.7643, pp. 60{64.
Francis, Charles (2009). Lindblad's epicycles - valid method or bad science? arXiv:
0911.1594 [physics.gen-ph] .
Gillon, Micha el et al. (2016). \Temperate Earth-sized planets transiting a nearby
ultracool dwarf star". In: Nature 533.7602, pp. 221{224.
Howell, Elizabeth (Apr. 2018). Fermi Paradox: Where Are the Aliens? url:https:
//www.space.com/25325-fermi-paradox.html .
Jones, Andrew Zimmerman (May 2019). How Stars Make All of the Elements .url:
https://www.thoughtco.com/stellar-nucleosynthesis-2699311 .
Kaku, Michio (2008). Physics of the impossible: a scientic exploration into the world
of phasers, force elds, teleportation, and time travel . Doubleday.
Kennedy, Tom (Apr. 2020). Pseudo-random numbers generators .url:https://
www.math.arizona.edu/ ~tgk/mc/book_chap3.pdf .
Lindegren, L (2010). Dynamical Astronomy: Lecture Notes for ASTM13 . Lund Ob-
servatory.
Lineweaver, Charles H (2001). \An estimate of the age distribution of terrestrial
planets in the universe: quantifying metallicity as a selection eect". In: Icarus
151.2, pp. 307{313.
49
BIBLIOGRAPHY BIBLIOGRAPHY
Makarov et al. (Aug. 2004). \Kinematics of stellar associations: The epicycle ap-
proximation and the convergent point method". In: Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society 352, pp. 1199{1207. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2004.
08012.x .
McMillan, Paul J (2017). \The mass distribution and gravitational potential of the
Milky Way". In: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society , stw2759.
Nasa (Jan. 2019). How Old Are Galaxies? url:https://spaceplace.nasa.gov/
galaxies-age/en/ .
Oliphant, Travis E (2006). A guide to NumPy . Vol. 1. Trelgol Publishing USA.
Olling, Rob P and Walter Dehnen (2003). \The Oort constants measured from
proper motions". In: The Astrophysical Journal 599.1, p. 275.
SETI (2020). url:https://www.seti.org/drake-equation-index .
Spiegel, David S and Edwin L Turner (2011). \Life might be rare despite its early
emergence on Earth: a Bayesian analysis of the probability of abiogenesis". In:
ArXiv e-prints .
Stella, Rose (2019). \Strange Planets That Are Both Interesting And Terrifying."
In:url:https://www.boredpanda.com/strangest-weirdest-interesting-
exoplanets-space/?utm_source=google&utm_medium=organic&utm_campaign=
organic[Accessed%2024%20March%202020] .
Van Den Bosch, Frank (Mar. 2020). Orbits in Axisymmetric Potentials .url:http:
//www.astro.yale.edu/vdbosch/lecture6.pdf .
Virtanen, Pauli et al. (2020). \SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientic
Computing in Python". In: Nature Methods .doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41592-019-0686-2 .
Zackrisson, Erik et al. (Dec. 2016). \TERRESTRIAL PLANETS ACROSS SPACE
AND TIME". In: The Astrophysical Journal 833.2, p. 214. issn: 1538-4357. doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/833/2/214 .url:http://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-
4357/833/2/214 .
50
